
== Support for C/C++

Rant can automatically determine the dependencies between C/C++ source
files. Use the C::Dependencies generator:
    
    import "c/dependencies"
    gen C::Dependencies

This generates a task called "c_dependencies" which will scan all
C/C++ source files in the current directory and all subdirectories for
#include statements and write the dependencies to the file
"c_dependencies". It searches for include files in the current
directory.

If you want to specify which directories it should search for include
files, give the +search+ option:
    gen C::Dependencies, :search => %w(. include)
Rant will search for include files in the current and in the "include"
directory now.

If you want to create the dependencies only for a specific set of
source files or for source files with non-standard filename
extensions, give a list with the +sources+ option:
    gen C::Dependencies, :sources => sys["**/*.cxx"]
This task will create the dependencies for all files ending in ".cxx".

Of course you can combine this options and you can give another
task/filename as first argument:
    gen C::Dependencies, "depend.rf"
	:search => "include",
	:sources => sys["**/*.cxx"]
This creates a file task with the name "depend.rf".

Note that all our previous examples only created a filetask with the
dependencies, to use them you have to load them in your Rantfile. So
you probably want to call the +source+ command:

    gen C::Dependencies

    # invoke task "c_dependencies" and load the created file
    source "c_dependencies"

And a good habit would be to wrap the +source+ expression in an
+Action+ block:

    gen C::Dependencies

    # Do dependency checking only if at least one task will be
    # invoked.
    gen Action do source "c_dependencies" end

or more selective:

    gen C::Dependencies

    # Do dependency checking when Rant looks at the first file
    # ending in ".h" or ".c"
    gen Action, /\.(h|c)$/ do source "c_dependencies" end

For a little example project using the C::Dependency generator look
into the doc/examples/c_dependencies[link:../examples/c_dependencies]
directory of the Rant distribution.

== See also

Rantfile basics::
    doc/rantfile.rdoc[link:files/doc/rantfile_rdoc.html]
Advanced Rantfiles::
    doc/advanced.rdoc[link:files/doc/advanced_rdoc.html]
Tasks with command change recognition::
    doc/command.rdoc[link:files/doc/command_rdoc.html]
Rant Overview::
    README[link:files/README.html]
