.\"  Name: Rant
.\"  Program Author: Stefan Lang
.\"  Author: Russel Winder from a work by Ralph Amissah
.\"  Description: Flexible, Ruby-based make 
.\"  License: GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL)
.\"  Notes: Process this file with
.\"    groff -man -Tascii rant.1
.\"    nroff -man rant.1 | most 
.TH rant\-import 1  "2006-10-22" "version 0.5.8" "rant\-import"
.SH NAME
rant-import \- creates a Rant-independent Rantfile for distribution of a project that uses
.B Rant 
.PP
.SH SYNOPSIS
rant-import
.RI [ options ]
MONO_RANTFILE
.SH DESCRIPTION
The rant\-import command creates a monolithic
.B Rant
script tailored to the needs of a given project so that that project may be distributed and then build
without a dependency on a
.B Rant
installation.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -h, --help
Print this help and exit.
.TP
.B -V,  --version
Print version of rant-import and exit.
.TP
.B -q, --quiet
Operate quietly.
.TP
.B -p PLUGINS,  --plugins PLUGINS
Include PLUGINS (comma separated list).
.TP
.B -i IMPORTS,  --imports IMPORTS
Include IMPORTS (comma separated list).
.TP
.B   --force
Force overwriting of output file.
.TP
.B   --with-comments
Include comments from
.B Rant
sources.
.TP
.B  -r, --reduce-whitespace
Remove as much whitespace from Rant sources as possible.
.TP
.B -z,  --zip
      Compress created script.
.TP
.B  -a, --auto
      Automatically try to determine imports and plugins.
      Warning: loads Rantfile!
.TP
.B -f RANTFILE,  --rantfile RANTFILE
Load RANTFILE. This also sets --auto!  May be given multiple times.
.SH INVOCATION
Probably the easiest way to create your monolithic
.B Rant
script is with the \-\-auto option:
.PP
    % rant-import \-\-auto ant
.PP
This will write a monolithic
.B Rant script to the file
.I ant
in the current directory. To determine which plugins and imports your project is using, it performs step 2
of the rant command as described in doc/rant.rdoc, which means that it loads the Rantfile in the current
directory.
.PP
That one command should be enough:
.PP
    % ruby ant
.PP
This script has the same behaviour as the rant command. Distribute it with your project and nobody else
but you needs an Rant installation.
.SH FURTHER INFORMATION
.PP
For more information on 
.I Rant
see:
.I <http://rant.rubyforge.org/>
.PP
.I <http://rant.rubyforge.org/files/doc/rant-import_rdoc.html>
.PP
.SH AUTHOR
.B Rant
was originally authored by Stefan Lang.  It is now maintained by Xavier Shay, Russel Winder and others.
.PP
This manual page by Russel Winder from a work by Ralph Amissah.
.PP
The Debian package of
.B Rant
is maintained by Ralph Amissah
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rant (1)
